[Music]
Hello everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger, and this
is the second video where we're talking about
multiplicative functions and Dirichlet series via
box arithmetic. So today we're going to look at
a particular kind of construction that occurs
in analytic number theory called the Dirichlet
series. Here’s a general form of a Dirichlet
series, A(s), it's generally regarded that s
is a complex number variable. It's a sum from n
= 1 to infinity of a sub n over n to the s. So a
sub n is some prior sequence, and we're summing
these sort of weighted reciprocals of powers.
Now, it turns out that these kinds of series form,
in some sense, an algebra under a certain type
of product or convolution. The core example
of such a thing, sort of the motivating one,
is the Riemann zeta function where the sequence
a sub n is just the constant sequence one. Most
undergraduates will probably not have touched base
with this too much unless they've taken sort of
specialized courses in analytic number theory, but
I want to sort of reposition this topic as a sort
of elementary aspect of box arithmetic. So I think
that what’s really happening here is in some sense
very general and sort of fundamental at a certain
level and will also give us a chance to reposition
our thinking a little bit about how we think
about polynomials and what kind of operations
we apply in arithmetic and how we apply
them. Lots to think about in this lecture.
But before I go there, let me just give my
usual reservations about this kind of thing. So,
right from my point of view, this is all in quotes
because, first of all, it doesn’t make sense in
general to take a natural number and raise it
to a general complex number. That doesn’t mean
anything to me or doesn’t mean anything precise.
If n is five and s is, you know, 9/7 plus 4/3,
what does it mean to raise five to that complex
power? I mean, if you actually ask what exactly
do you get, then you typically only receive
some ambiguous answer from the analysts or the
number theorists, and so that sort of renders
this thing sort of necessarily not a proper
function. So we're almost immediately dealing
with something which doesn’t really make sense.
And then, when we attempt to sort of add up
all of these things or extend our arithmetic
from the finite sums and finite products and so
on that we're used to, to some kind of infinite
domain as suggested by this, then we're just
magnifying those problems. So one of the aims
here is to find some alternative way of thinking
about arithmetic so that we don’t have to always
be invoking these essentially nonsensical
appeals to doing an infinite number of
things. We want to reinterpret the current
understanding so that it can be expressed
in a way that a computer can understand
and work with explicitly, concretely.
So, one of the interesting and appealing aspects
of box arithmetic is that there's sort of this
natural layering of things, a sort of natural
way of going from one step to the next step
lower down which is more complicated. So that
involves the objects that we’re talking about,
like zeros and natural numbers and
poly numbers and multi-numbers,
etc. But it also includes the operations,
starting with addition, then multiplication,
then the carrot operation, and further products
that we haven’t talked much at all about. So
today the carrot operation is going to play an
important role. We want to bring that forward
a little bit and emphasize that this is not some
obscure kind of thing; it's actually really very
important for fundamental arithmetic but
also for applications to number theory.
Okay, so let me just review some things and
introduce a slight variant to things that we
already know about. So, we know that a natural
number is a box of zeros. Zero is just an empty
box. There’s a zero; there's a zero. Now, here's
a box with two zeros in it—that's what we think
of as being the number two. Here’s a box with
one zero in it—that's what we think of as being
the number one. Okay, that’s very familiar,
I hope. Let’s introduce a slight variant of
that which is particularly useful when we
are thinking about the carrot operation.
So, a natural star number—this is a new
definition, and whether it should be like this or
maybe natural to the star, I won’t fuss around too
much about what the actual terminology is. We’ll
just loosely talk about it this way for now. What
this thing is, is a non-empty box of zeros. So,
when we’re talking about natural numbers, this
thing here qualifies as a natural number because
it’s a box of zeros which happens to be empty.
When we go to nat star, we want to exclude the
zero. So we want to start counting from one: 1,
2, 3. Here we’re counting from 0, 1, 2, 3. So,
in mathematics, there’s this dichotomy about
whether in a given situation you should start
counting with zero or start counting with one,
and in different situations, either of those
could be maybe more apt, more convenient.
What we’re doing here is just introducing
some alternate notation so that in those cases
where it’s more convenient to count starting
with one, that we have some pre-existing
notation for that. So that’s nat star.
And then, when we go down a level to poly,
I remind you that a poly is a box of natural
numbers, natural numbers in this sense here. So
let’s define poly star to be a box of natural
star numbers. So a poly star is like a poly except
that when you look inside the box at the natural
numbers that are appearing in there, you don’t
find any zeros. Okay, so that’s a poly star.
Okay, so let’s have a look at poly star. All
right, these are poly numbers that don’t have
any zeros inside them. So here’s A and here
is B. These are both poly star numbers. It’s
a box of natural numbers. You recognize
this is the natural number one, this is
the natural number one, this is the natural
number three. Here’s the natural number one,
here’s the natural number two. So these are
both boxes of natural numbers, but they’re
natural star numbers because there are no zeros
in these boxes. In other words, there are no
empty boxes by themselves as elements. So let me
just remind you about the basic three operations.
Addition is just dumping all the entries into a
new box. So A plus B is just this thing here in
the obvious fashion. A times B, the way we get
that is we form all possible combinations of an
element in A and an element in B and we add those
two elements. So if we add this and this, we get
this. This and this, we get this. This and this,
we get this. This and this, we get this. This and
this, we get this. And this and this, we get this.
Okay, so that’s the product of these two boxes.
And then we have the carrot operation. Okay,
so the carrot of two boxes is the box you get
by taking elements in A and elements
in B and now multiplying them. Okay,
multiplying them, not adding them as we did
for the multiplication. So this times this,
well, this is one and this is one, so one
times one is one. And one times two is
two. And one times one is one. And one
times two is two. And three times one is
three. And three times two is six.
So there is the carrot of A and B.
And let’s just remind ourselves that we have a
kind of distributive property. First of all, both
these properties are commutative and both of them
are associative. But what about distributivity?
Well, both of them are distributive with
respect to addition. So A times B plus C
is A times B plus A times C. And also A carrot
B plus C equals A carrot B plus A carrot C. So,
in terms of doing algebra, we might say,
okay, in this domain of just poly stars,
we could look at the familiar operations of
addition and multiplication, and that would
give us the usual polynomial algebra that
we've been thinking about since, you know,
at least high school. But we could also do
something that we’re much less familiar with.
We could look at an algebra formed by considering
addition and the carrot operation because the
carrot operation and the addition are related
in this nice way via this distributive law. And
we have commutativity and associativity of both
operations. So, you know, that’s a very natural
thing to think about: what happens, what does
that look like, that sort of algebra structure?
All right, so we can ask ourselves, what does
this plus-carrot algebra of poly star look like?
But before we do that, let me answer a natural
question, which is why are we considering poly
star instead of just poly? Because, after all,
the carrot operation works on polys just as well
as it does on poly stars. Well, here’s the answer.
Suppose you have this poly times this poly. Okay,
the way we multiply them, we just take all
possible sums. So zero plus zero is zero. Zero
plus two is two. One plus zero is one. And one
plus two is three. And three plus zero is three.
And three plus two is five. Fine. And now suppose
we look at the carrot of these two things. So now
we have to multiply things. So zero times zero is
zero. Zero times two is zero. One times zero is
zero. One times two is two. Three times zero
is zero. And three times two is six. Well,
we see that these two zeros here, because we’re
doing a lot of multiplications, mean that we’re
getting a lot more zeros at the next stage. And
if we took this thing here and multiplied it by
some other poly with a zero in it, then the result
would have even more zeros. So these zeros kind of
reproduce like rabbits, you know, and it’s not
so interesting. It’s just not so interesting.
So it’s for that reason that we’re going to
restrict ourselves in this little world here
just to poly stars so that all our poly numbers
start with ones, if anything, there are no zeros.
So for example, let’s do a bit of arithmetic here.
Let’s take the poly star 1 2 3 and carrot it with
itself. So we look at all possible products.
One times one is one. One times two is two.
One times three is three. Two times one is
two. Two times two is four. Two times three
is six. Three times one is three. Three times
two is six. Three times three is nine. We get
this box here. And we could a little bit more
efficiently describe that by not repeating all
the repetitions, but just recording how many of
each of the things there are. So there’s one one,
so we don’t need to say anything, but there’s
two twos, so beside the two, we’ll put a little
two to the left. Okay, it means sort of
like two of them. And there’s two threes,
so we’ll put a little two to the left and below
the three. There’s one four, there’s one six,
and there’s one nine. So this is a little bit
more efficient way of describing that same result.
Now, if we were going to go down this road, we
could be a little bit more efficient. So what
we’re really doing here is recording the various
multiplicities that the various possible natural
numbers that are allowed, namely 1 2 3 4 etc.,
are appearing with. Okay, so another way of doing
this a bit more systematically is to just list all
the natural numbers from 1 to 9 in this case and
record for each one of them the multiplicity that
we're getting with this thing here. There’s one
one, there’s two twos, there’s two threes, there’s
one four, there’s zero fives, there’s one six,
there’s zero sevens, there’s zero eights,
there’s one nine. And when we do that,
we see that essentially another way of
thinking about this box is in terms of
this list of multiplicities. Okay, it's a list
now because it’s ordered because we’re using the
fact that our natural numbers are naturally
ordered, starting with one, in this case,
our natural star numbers, 1 2 3 4 etc. So it
makes sense to just record the multiplicity,
right? We don’t really need to repeat these
numbers here. We know what they are by their
positions. So we just record 1 2 2 1 0 1 0 0
1. And from this, if we wanted to know what
the multiplicity of five is, we go 1 2 3 4 5.
Ah, there’s zero fives. And how many sixes are
there? 1 2 3 4 5 6. There’s one six, etc. Okay,
so this is actually quite an important thing that
we have a multiset on one hand. So this multiset
here, which is unordered, has repetitions,
can be alternately encoded by a multiplicity list,
which is now a list in the sense that it’s ordered
and repetitions are allowed. So this accords
with our general LS, lists, ORD sets, multisets,
sets sort of notation. We’re using square brackets
to denote lists, like a computer scientist would.
Okay, so a little bit more formally now, let’s
officially introduce the idea of the multiplicity
list or M list of a poly star. So the multiplicity
list or M list of the poly star P. So here it is
written in the form where we're recording the
number of ones. So there’s a1 ones, there’s
a2 twos, there’s a3 threes, all the way up to say
a sub k k's. This is a poly star because there are
no zeros. Okay, so that’s a box. It’s an unordered
collection where repetitions are allowed. And now
what we’re going to do is introduce this other
data structure, which is a list where we just
record the numbers or the multiplicities of all
of the natural numbers in order, 1 2 3 all the way
up to wherever we’re going. So we record a1 a2 a3
all the way up to a sub k. Let’s call that M of P,
the multiplicity list of P. P is a poly star. This
is something a little bit different, although it’s
pretty well equivalent to this, right? But it’s
in the form of a list or equivalently a vector,
pretty well the same thing. So the entries
here are going to be, well, in this case,
natural numbers, but including zero, right? So
it’s certainly possible for the number of threes
to be zero. So this thing is going to have zeros
in it. This thing doesn’t have zeros. And it’s
also usual to sort of allow this convention
to be flexible about the end, you know. So,
I mean, if the last entry here had happened to be
zero, well, you know, we could in principle get
rid of that. So we'll allow ourselves to append
zeros or remove zeros at the end and regard those
things as being equal. That makes the addition
operation on poly stars sort of transferable
to the vector world, right? Where if you
allow the vectors to have more entries,
if we’re adding a vector with five
entries and a vector with seven entries,
we just think of padding that vector with
five entries with the two additional zeros,
and then they have the same size,
and then we just add component-wise.
Okay, so now let’s introduce what we
call the carrot convolution of M lists.
What we’re going to do here is we’re
going to transfer the carrot operation,
which is on poly stars, to a corresponding
operation on the associated multiplicity
lists. So there's a correspondence between these
poly stars and these multiplicity lists. If we
know the poly star, we know the multiplicity
list. If we know the multiplicity list, then we
can recover the poly star. So they're completely
equivalent. But over here in the poly star world,
we have this operation of carrot. So we can
just define the operation over here in the
world of lists or vectors to be the corresponding
thing. So formally, if P, Q, and R are poly stars,
let’s say with P carrot Q equals R, then we’ll
define M of P convolution M of Q to be M of R.
Here’s the multiplicity list of P. Here’s the
multiplicity list of Q. We’re going to define
this operation to be what it has to be in order
to get M of R so that the convolution here exactly
corresponds with the carrot operation in the world
of poly stars. So let’s see what this looks like.
So here is a poly star, 1 1 3. Here’s another poly
star, 1 2 2, and we’re going to carrot them. That
means take all possible products. So one times
one is one. One times two is two. One times two is
two. One times one is one. One times two is two.
One times two is two. Three times one is three.
Three times two is six. Three times two is six.
Okay, in terms of multiplicities. So another way
of sort of thinking about this is to record the
multiplicities that the various numbers involved
come with. So the numbers involved here are from
the range one to three, so we can record this
thing as being two ones, zero twos, and one three.
We can record this thing as being a single one,
two twos, and zero threes. And over here, I guess
we have two ones, one two, four twos, a single
three, there are no fours, there are no fives, and
there are two sixes. Okay, so at the level of the
multiplicity lists, the multiplicity list for this
would be 2 0 1. The multiplicity list for this is
1 2 0. Okay, but that zero at the end, we've
agreed, it's not really necessary, so it's the
same as just 1 2. So according to this definition,
the convolution of this M list and this M list
should be the multiplicity list for this thing,
which is 2 4 1 0 0 2. Right, so we’ve defined
an algebraic structure, essentially, on vectors,
coming from the fact that we can identify these
vectors with poly stars. And over in the poly star
world, we have the carrot operation, so we're just
bringing the carrot operation into the world of
vectors where it’s a little bit less familiar.
So let’s see what’s actually involved. So maybe
I'll do it at this stage here. So let's say we had
to find the carrot of these two things, right? So
how many ones are going to be in the result? Well,
how do you get a one? We’re talking about
taking an element here and an element here
and multiplying them. So one times one is
one, so that’s the only way we’re going
to get a one over on this side. And
how many ones are there here? Well,
there's two of them. And how many ones are
there here? Well, there's one of them. So how
many possible products are we going to be able
to make that result in a one over here? Well,
there’s two of them here, there’s one there,
so we can do this one times this one or this
one times this one. There's two times one,
which is two possible ways of getting that.
How about two? We can get two by multiplying one
by two or two by one. So this combination here,
one times two, we can do that in two times two
possible ways. Okay, multiplicity here is two,
the multiplicity here is two. There are two
choices here, there are two choices here,
so the possible ways of pairing them up is two
times two. That's four. And the other way was
two times one. Well, there's zero twos over here
and only one. So there’s no way of getting a two
from that combination. So this two is being
obtained with multiplicity four. And that’s
because that four is coming from the product of
this multiplicity two with this multiplicity two.
So we can go through the else. Let me do
the six. Okay, how can we get a six? Well,
you get a six by either multiplying a two on
over here times a three over here, but there
are no ways of doing that, or by multiplying
a three over here with a two over here,
and there are one times two, two ways of doing
that. So that’s what this carrot convolution
sort of looks like at the level of the actual
M lists or vectors or multiplicity lists.
Okay, so let's have a look at another example
to get us used to how this carrot convolution
works at the level of these multiplicity lists.
So here’s a multiplicity list, 2 1 3, and here’s
another one, 0 1 4, and we’re taking the carrot
convolution of them. And I'm claiming that we get
this multiplicity list. Okay, so to try to explain
that, let’s just step back one step and convert it
again just to boxes. So this is the multiplicity
list of an M set which has ones, twos, and threes,
and there are two ones, one two, and three threes.
This one here is an M set with zero ones, one two,
and four threes. Okay, so when we take the carrot
of those two things, we can get any number from
one up to nine, all possible products. Okay, so
how are we going to get a one? Only by taking a
one here and multiplying it by a one here. But
there are two of these over here and there are
zero over there, so there's no such product
that will contribute to a one there. So that's
going to be zero, which is the product of this
two and that zero. How about two? We can get a
product of two by taking a one times a two or a
two times a one. If we take a one times a two,
there's two ones over here and one two over
here, so there are two ways of actually doing
that product: one times two or the other
one times two. So there's two twos coming
from that combination. And there's also a
possibility of a two times a one, but there
are zero ones over there, so one times zero
is zero. So there's a total of two ways there.
How about three? How can we get three? We can
get three by taking a one here and a three there,
and there are two times four ways of doing
that. Eight possible ways because the other way,
a three and a one, is not possible
because there aren’t any ones.
How about four? We can get a four only by
multiplying two by two, and there’s one times one,
one way of doing that. There’s no way of getting
a five as a product. How about six? We can get
six by multiplying a two times a three, and
there’s one times four ways of doing that,
so four ways of doing that. Or by multiplying
a three over here times a two over there,
and there's three times one, three ways of doing
that, for a total of seven ways of getting six.
Can’t get a seven, can’t get an eight, and to
get a nine we have to take a three times a three,
and there’s three times four ways, twelve.
So then we run through the multiplicity
list. Here it is right there: 0 2 8 1 0
7 0 0 12. Okay, what’s the general rule
just at the level of multiplicity lists? We have
one sequence a_n, just the elements in the list
starting from one, a_1, a_2, a_3, etc., up to some
a_k. And then in the second one we have b_1, b_2,
up to b_l. So when we’re convolving them, we're
going to get another sequence as a result, c_1,
c_2, up to, well, the maximum possible is k
times l because that's the maximum possible
product that you’re going to be able to get. And
what is this c_n in terms of the a's and the b's?
Here's the critical formula: the m-th one. So c_m
is obtained by asking, well, how can we get an m?
How can we get an m? We can get an m by choosing
any two numbers that multiply to m, okay? So any
two factors that multiply to m and seeing how many
of them there are on this side and on this side
and multiplying those multiplicities. So if there
are, say, a_i i’s and b_j j’s, and i times j is m,
then we're going to get a contribution from those
which is just the product of a_i times b_j, but we
have to sum over all possible ways of writing
that m as a product of i times j. That’s what
we've been doing here. Okay, so this is a basic
important formula that defines what’s usually
called the Dirichlet convolution, but we're
calling it the carrot convolution because it's
in a different kind of context. This is a more
elementary arithmetic; the analytic number theory
is actually far away. We're just talking about
basic arithmetic with very fundamental things.
Okay, so in the last slide here, I want to
come full circle, and I want to connect this
with the Dirichlet series that I told you about
in our first slide, coming from number theory.
And it’s a chance for us to zoom out a little
bit and think about mathematical notation. Okay,
so actually what I'm going to say now I think is
quite interesting. It’s a little bit subtle. Okay,
so we have these sort of two algebraic worlds
that we're sort of comparing here. There's the
poly number world, where we have polys and the
operations of interest are the usual familiar
ones of addition and multiplication. Let me just
remind you about that. Okay, so here is a poly,
0 1 4 4 4. And one way of describing that is
it's two times this box plus this box plus three
times this box. And in this world, we’ve formally
brought in this sort of notation to make things a
little bit easier and also to align with the usual
polynomial algebra. We said, let’s define this
thing here to be one. In some sense, this is the
first poly number which is not a natural number,
the first thing that you get when you go up one
level or down one level from numbers to poly
numbers. So we defined alpha to be this particular
poly number. And then something like this one
here, we saw that that was just the product of
alpha with itself four times: alpha times alpha
times alpha times alpha. So it was reasonable
to use this sort of exponential notation that
we’re already familiar with to describe this
thing here. Right, so we had this is like two
times one or two, just two. This is alpha,
and this is three times alpha to four. Okay,
so this is the familiar s of poly number language
that I've used in many different situations. Let
me just suggest to you a slightly different
take on this, okay? A slightly different take.
So an alternative is to describe this thing here
in this form, which is a little bit more verbose,
to say, well, it's two alpha to the zero plus one
alpha to the one plus three alpha to the four.
Okay, where this symbol alpha to the n, where
n is a natural number, is just a symbol for the
poly number with the single entry n. So we could
imagine, you know, talking to some people who,
some students from a different culture, who
are not at all used to our particular notation
for arithmetical operations, you know. They've
never seen an exponential, for example. Right,
so to them something like alpha with an n on the
top right is sort of arbitrary, sort of like if
I wrote an alpha with an n on the top left. You'd
think, well, what's that supposed to mean? Okay,
but from that point of view, what we're doing
here is saying, look, let’s just agree that
instead of using this terminology for this box,
we'll use this terminology. So we're not assuming
that you know what an exponential is. Okay,
that's not what we're doing. We’re just saying,
let’s just introduce this particular combination
of symbols to represent this thing here. And then
if they ask, well, what is alpha now? The
answer is, well, it's just a symbol. It's
just a letter that we're using conveniently
sort of to give the n something to sit on,
right? We know from this point of view alpha is
not actually equal to this thing here. In fact,
this thing here is not equal to alpha. It's equal
to alpha to the one. It’s equal to alpha to the
one. And this thing here is not equal to one. This
is equal to alpha to the zero. From that point of
view, these objects are all of the form alpha to
the n. You have to have an exponent to bring one
of these things into being. The question of what
is the box alpha is meaningless. There is no box
alpha from this point of view. Okay, so it’s
an alternative to what we're usually doing, and
you can see that's, in some sense, a little bit
more consistent because we’re not treating this
case and this case sort of specially. See, over
here, all subsequent ones had actual exponents,
but this one doesn't have an exponent. And here
there’s not even an alpha because we're kind of
used to it, right? But in some sense, this is sort
of more logical. The Babylonians would probably
prefer this because we’re completely
consistent right from the beginning.
Okay, so having said that, let’s now apply the
same kind of thinking to the poly star world,
where we're interested in these two operations,
addition and the carrot operation. Okay,
so here is a poly star. It has to start with or
not start with, but it can’t have any zeros. So 1
1 1 2 5 5. Now we've seen that another way of
representing this thing is with its multiplicity
list. There's three ones, there’s one two,
there’s zero threes, there’s zero fours,
and there’s two fives. Okay, but in the same
spirit as over here, here might be an alternative
way of expressing, or more maybe more concisely
or just an alternate way of expressing this poly
star. Okay, so let’s write it as three times
one to the r plus one times two to the r plus
two times five to the r. Now, I could also
write this in vector notation. So, you know,
if I was doing it in this fashion here, this one
to the r would really represent the vector one,
1 0 0 0 0. And this two to the r would really
represent the vector 0 1 0 0 0. And this
five to the r would really represent the vector
0 0 0 0 0 1. Okay, so in some sense these things
here are just representing sort of basis vectors
in this linear world of the multiplicity lists.
And so you can say, well, okay, but what is
the r? What do we mean by to the r? Is that
an exponentiation? No, it’s not an exponentiation.
It’s just a symbol that we’ve introduced exactly
in parallel to this one here, but it's a symbol
which naturally and pleasantly accords with our
usual arithmetic. Because over here, when we do
the carrot operation and we are multiplying two
guys in here, then this exponentiation naturally
fits with that. And so if you have two to the
r times three to the r, you're going to get
six to the r. You have to multiply the base
over here. If you have alpha to the two and
alpha to the three and you’re multiplying them,
you have to add the two and the three. Okay,
adding is sort of where the multiplication
is coming from. The carrot is coming from
the multiplying the interior objects. Now,
you might say, oh, well, an alternative to this
is to just introduce a different symbol and
sort of make a fraction and put these powers of
one, two, three, etc. down in the denominators.
And so you could do that. So we could also
have said, well, instead of writing this,
let’s write this. The advantage in doing
either this or this is that when we want
to do this carrot convolution, it just ends up
being ordinary multiplication in the usual sense
of our familiar operations with objects like
this, just using the ordinary laws of algebra.
And why do number theorists want to
put things in the denominator? Well,
it’s exactly because they’re interested in
convergence. Like in the Riemann zeta function,
they’re interested in having a series so that
when you actually plug in a value of s, okay,
that you’re going to get something which
converges. For us, that’s not so important
because we don’t believe in, you know, the
convergence or otherwise of infinite series.
For us, it’s actually more natural just to
use this. This is a kind of a simplified
version of the Dirichlet series where we’re
not putting things in the denominators. We
don’t need denominators. We can just
have powers of one and two and five,
etc. as sort of symbols which represent the
various multiplicities of these basis vectors.
So what I’m saying here is that the usual
Dirichlet series and the Dirichlet convolution or
product is, in some sense, just an elementary and
very reasonable constituent of box arithmetic once
we’ve gone from the addition and multiplication
levels down to the carrot operation. Okay,
and we're just introducing the carrot into the
world of poly numbers and having a look at how
it interacts with addition. And there’s an
algebra structure, and we’re just describing
that algebra structure. So it's, in fact, very
natural. It's not impossible on some other planet
they learned about this in primary school.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.